Getting and Cleaning Data: Project Assignment


This code book is intended for the file 'TidyData.txt' that has been generated by running the R program run_analysis. The source of TidyData file is based on data collected by Samsung Galaxy S phone sensors (accelrometer & gyrometer) used by 30 different people (subjects) performing various kinds of activities like: Sitting, Standing, Walking, Walking Downstairs, Walking Upstairs, and Laying. The phones have collected various kinds of information from subjects performing various tasks that have been captured in essentially 'Test' and 'Train' settings. The raw data provided to us as a part of this Data Science project has then been transformed to arrive at what is included in TidyData. The explanation of how raw data has been transformed and what it contains is illustrated in the sections below.

TidyData Variables:

The following variables are a part of the file TidyData.txt that is an outcome of executing run_analysis.R file. The run_analysis.R generates TidyData post reading and processing of the raw data set provided to us as a part of this project. 

1. SubjectId: This field identifies the id associated with each unique subject. Each subject participating in the experiment has been identified with an Id.

2. Activity: This field relates to the activites that the subjects have been performing against which there is data captured.

3. There are various measurements that have been taken by the phone sensors a summary of which is listed below. These fields are listed from column 3 onwards (until the end). Each of the readings have been summarised (calculating 'mean') by SubjectId and Activity.

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation


Data:
As explained in the above variable section, data collected from phone sensors have been summarised from the raw data source such that only readings related to 'mean' and 'standard deviations' have been included, and the average (mean) of these 'mean' and 'stadard deviation' columns have been taken for each unique Subject Id and Activity. The process of transforming raw data into TidyDat has been explained in the transformation section below.


Transformation:

The raw data source and information related to it has been provided to you in the dataset downloaded from the site below. (https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip). The following transformations have been applied to the raw data to arrive at TidyData.

1. Read 'activity_labels.txt' in order to obtain the textual description of each activity performed by the subject.
2. Read 'features.txt' to get a list of all the measurement variables provided by Samsung phones.
3. Read 'subject_test.txt' & 'subject_train.txt' files to get a list of subject id's
4. Read 'Y_test.txt' & 'Y_train.txt' to get all the rows that have the activity id's. These activity id's were replaces by activity labels (in step 1) in order to gain meaningful information in the database.
5. Read 'X_test.txt' & 'X_train.txt' to get all the rows that have the phone measurements. The column names were assigned to these measurements from the feature list (in Step 2).
6. File from Step 3, 4 & 5 were merged to get a common file (to include Test and Train data).
7. Only measurements related to mean and standard deviation were extrated from step 6. All other columns were discarded.
8. A mean of all columns (containing measurements) were done by Subject Id & Activity to load them into TidyData.txt.
